# sticky-table

Tools to make a large HTML table header and sidebar sticky when scrolling.

# Package Status: Work In Progress

Do not use this in production.

## Anatomy of a table

(or atleast what this package assumes and prepares for)

A table consists of
- a header
- a sidebar
- optionally multiple sections, where a section has its own single row section header
- a single table body, or multiple, one for each section

The table header can have multiple rows, and any kind of merged cells.

The table sidebar can have multiple columns, and any kind of merged cells.

A table section header is a single table row usually fully merged and stlyed like the table header.

Sections can be separated into their own `<tbody>` where the first row is the section header, or just left in one big `<tbody>` element.

## Usage

1. Include the CSS and JS into your HTML document.
  - Include prebuilt in HTML: `dist/sticky-table.css` and `dist/sticky-table.js`.
  - Or import source and build: `src/sticky-table.scss` in Sass and `src/sticky-table.ts` in TS module.

2. Mark your table element with `sticky` class, or call `StickyTables.init(options)` to access advanced customization options.


### Example
```html
<table class="sticky">
  <thead>
    <tr><th>A</th><th>B</th><th>C</th></tr>
    <tr><th>AA</th><th>BB</th><th>CC</th></tr>
  </thead>
  <tbody>
    <tr><th>1</th><th>11</th><th>111</th></tr>
    <tr><th>2</th><th>22</th><th>222</th></tr>
    <tr><th>3</th><th>33</th><th>333</th></tr>
  </tbody>
</table>
<script>
  StickyTables.init();
</script>
```

## CSS implementation details

For the CSS to work it is required to have `aria-colindex` and `aria-rowindex` attributes on every table cell.
This helps to properly reference each header row and each sidebar column targeted to be sticky.

To position each row and column correctly, we use CSS properties that is applied by `addStickyTableCssVariables(table)` function to the table element. This defines each row height and each column width which allows us to have multi-row tall header and multi-column wide sidebar.

Our tables can have sections, usually in a form of the whole table row merged together.
This package currently provides support for vertically sectioned tables only, with a limitation of equal height rows for the section headers.
Mark each row element with `sticky` class and the row will always stick below the table header while scrolling down.

### Classes

Only a `sticky` class is defined, and does different things when present on different elements.

- On a `<table>` element: Makes the table header and sidebar to be sticky.
- On a `<tr>` element: Makes the entire row stick to the table viewport.
- On a `<span>` in a table cell: Makes the contents of the cell stick to the table viewport. Eg. for merged cells spanning a lot of columns/rows containing some text that should be visible.

> Note: Sticky rows (section headers) can have sticky spans in them. The sticky span makes the content always aligned to screen center.

> TODO: instead of screen width, we should implement `--viewport-width` property. Removes the need of `--scrollbar-size-y`.

### CSS variables

The following CSS variables used by the table cells:

- `--stickytables-row-<i>-top`: Pixel value to offset table header rows.
- `--stickytables-top`: Pixel value to offset things below the last table header row.
- `--stickytables-column-<i>-left`: Pixel value to offset table sidebar columns.
- `--stickytables-left`: Pixel value to offset things next to the last table sidebar column.
- `--cellpadding-x`: Cell padding on the x axis. Used by sticky `<span class="sticky">` tags in table cells.
- `--cellpadding-y`: Cell padding on the y axis. Used by sticky `<span class="sticky">` tags in table cells.
- `--scrollbar-size-y`: Used by the table section header cell(s) containing a `<span class="sticky">`.

These variables are generated by the `init` script automatically with the exception of the `--cellpadding-x/y`.

> TODO: generate `--cellpadding-x/y`.

## Usage without scripts (maybe remove this section)

Usage without the script is only available when you have
- max 1 row tall table header
- max 1 column wide sidebar
- no merges in header or sidebar
- no table sections
- no sticky content in cells

In this case you have to apply `sticky` class to the table element and `aria-colindex`, `aria-rowindex` attributes for each cell manually.

Additionally you might need to set the following to mark the sticky top and left offsets:
```css
table.sticky {
  --stickytables-row-0-top: 0px;
  --stickytables-column-0-left: 0px;
}
```

However, in this case maybe a simple rule like this fits you better:
```css
table.sticky>thead>tr:first-child>th { position: sticky; top: 0; }
table.sticky>tbody>tr>th:first-child { position: sticky; left: 0; }
```

## Usage with custom init script (maybe remove this section)

You can write your own init script if you wish by the building blocks exported by the package.

```js
document.addEventListener('load', () => {
  const table = document.querySelector('table.sticky');
  // when no `aria-colindex` and `aria-rowindex` on table cells
  StickyTables.addTableCellAriaRowColIndexes(table);
  // to add css variables on the table element for multiline table headers
  StickyTables.addStickyTableCssVariables(table);
});
```

## Docs

### `init(options: InitOptions = {}): void`

This call prepares the table to work with the suppiled css.

You can specify the following options

- `ariaRowColIndexesExisting?: boolean;`

  When `aria-colindex` and `aria-rowindex` does not exists, a we generate them programmatically.

  Default: `false`


- `customSelector?: string;`

	CSS selector of the table element.

  Default: `table.sticky`


- `stickySections?: boolean | string;`

  Boolean or a single class name that marks section headers table rows.

  When `true` it targets rows with `sticky` class name.

  Default: `false`


- `stickyWrapHeadContent?: boolean;`

	Header cell contents wrapped in a sticky box to stick to screen when cells are wide.

  Default: `false`

- `stickyWrapSideContent?: boolean;`

  Sidebar cell contents wrapped in a sticky box to stick to screen when cells are tall

  Default: `false`


- `stickyWrapSectionsContent?: boolean;`

  Section content wrapped in a sticky box, centered on screen.

  Default: `false`


- `addScrollSizeY?: boolean;`

  Set and manage --scrollbar-size-y css variable, required by sticky-wrapped section cell centering.

  Default: `false`


- `offsetTop?: number | { (): number };`

  Offset sticky table screen top position.

  Default: `0`


- `offsetLeft?: number | { (): number };`

  Offset sticky table screen left position.

  Default: `0`


### `addTableCellAriaRowColIndexes(table: HTMLTableElement): void`

Generates the `aria-colindex` and `aria-rowindex` attributes on table cells.

Called by init when `ariaRowColIndexesExisting: true`.


### `addStickyTableCssVariables(table: HTMLTableElement, offsetTop = 0, offsetLeft = 0): void`

Generates CSS vairables required to keep multiple rows and columns on screen.

Always called by init.


### `stickyWrapHeadContent(table: HTMLTableElement): void`

Wraps each header cells content into a sticky box that keeps the cell content on-screen as much as possible.

Called by init when `stickyWrapHeadContent: true`.


### `stickyWrapSideContent(table: HTMLTableElement): void`

Wraps each sidebar cells content into a sticky box that keeps the cell content on-screen as much as possible.

Called by init when `stickyWrapSideContent: true`.

### `stickyWrapSectionsContent(table: HTMLTableElement): void`

Wraps each section header cell content into a sticky box that keeps the cell content on-screen and centered as much as possible.

Called by init when `stickyWrapSectionsContent: true`.

### `offsetTopsForSectionsWhenSideContentSticky(table: HTMLTableElement): void`

Modify the calculated CSS variables, account for section headers. Only useful when you called `stickyWrapSideContent()` and have table sections.

Called by init when `stickyWrapSideContent: true` and `stickySections: true | string`.

### `addScollbarSizeY(table: HTMLTableElement): void`

Generates the `--scrollbar-size-y` CSS variable. This sets the vertical scrollbar width in pixels. Only useful when `stickyWrapSectionsContent: true` and `stickySections: true | string`.

Called by init when `addScrollSizeY: true`.
